# S3 (Simple Storage Service) ([FAQs](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/faqs/))

## Important Points
1. It is Object based storage i.e. allows to upload files
2. The data is spread across multiple devices and facilities.
3. Files can be from 0 bytes to 5 TB
4. There is unlimited storage
5. Files are stored in buckets.
6. S3 is universal namespace, name must be unique globally.
7. HTTP 200 code is received if upload to S3 is successful. 
8. Built for 99.99% availability
9. 99.999999999% durability of data (11 X 9s)
10. Tiered storage available
11. Lifecycle management
12. Versioning is supported
13. Encryption is supported
14. Secure the data using Access control lists and bucket policies
15. Not suitable for OS or DBMS installation
16. You can load files to S3 much faster by enabling multipart upload

## What does it do?
- S3 provides developers and IT teams with secure, durable and highly-scalable object storage.

## Naming of an S3 bucket link
s3-region name-amazonaws.com/-name of the bucket
```
https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/acloudguru
```

## Naming of an S3 static website 
```
http://<your-bucket-name>.s3-website-<region>.amazonaws.com
```

## Data consistency model for S3
- Read after Write consistency for PUTS of new objects
- Eventual consistency for overwrite PUTS and Deletes i.e. can take some time to propogate (Updates)
- Updates to S3 are atomic (Either new data or old data)

## Core fundamentals of S3 object
- S3 is a key-value store
- Key(name of object)
- Value(data and is made up of sequence of bytes)
- Version id(important for versioning)
- metadata (data about data that is getting stored)
- S3 stores data in lexographical order of keys
- Subresources : Access Control List | Torrent

## Storage Tiers/Classes
- S3 : Designed to sustain loss of 2 facilities concurrently (Durable, immediately available, frequently accessed)
- S3 - IA(Infrequently Accessed) : Lower fee than S3 but has a retrieval fee. For data that is accessed less frequently (Durable, immediately available, infrequently accessed)
- Reduced Redundancy Storage : Designed to provide 99.99% durability and availability of objects over a given year (For data that is easily reproducible)
- Glacier : Very cheap. Used for data archival only. Takes 3-5 hours for restoring from Glacier

## S3 charges for-
- Storage
- Requests
- Storage management pricing
- Data transfer pricing
- Transfer acceleration

## Versioning
 - Stores all versions of an object (Including all writes and even if you delete an object)
 - Great backup tool
 - Once enabled, versioning cannot be disabled. Only suspended
 - To disable versioning, only way is to restore the bucket i.e. to delete the bucket and then recreate it
 - Integrates with Lifecycle rules
 - Versioning MFA Delete can provide an additional layer of authentication/security
 - Deleting something from S3 bucket just places a delete marker on it.

## Important points for Cross Region Replication (CRR)
 - Versioning must be enabled on source and destination buckets for Cross Region Replication(CRR)
 - Regions must be unique. Cannot do within the same region
 - For replication to be enabled, versioning has to be enabled.
 - Files in an existing bucket are not replicated automatically. All subsequent files are replicated automatically.
 - You cannot replicate to multiple buckets or do daisy chaining.
 - Copying contents from one bucket to another only copies the contents but not the permissions.
 - New objects in the copied buckets would have the same contents and permissions as that of source bucket.
 - Deleting something on a copied bucket does not affect that object on the source bucket.
 - Delete markers are replicated.

## Important points about Lifecycle Management
 - Can be used in conjunction with versioning
 - Can be applied to both current and previous versions
 - Actions: 
 	1. Transition to Standard-Infrequent Access Storage Class (128 KB and 30 days after creation date)
 	2. Archive to Glacier Storage Class(30 days after IA)
 	3. Permanently Delete

## AWS CLI Commands for S3
 - List the buckets
```
aws s3 ls
```
 - Copy all contents of bucket A to bucket B
```
aws s3 cp --recursive s3://A s3://B
```

## Important points about Glacier ([FAQs](https://aws.amazon.com/glacier/faqs/))
 - Glaciers are not present in South America and Asia Pacific

## Important points about S3 Security & Encryption
 - By default, all newly created buckets are PRIVATE
 - We can setup access control to buckets using:
 	1. Bucket Policies
 	2. Access Control Lists (ACLs)
 - S3 buckets can be configured to create access logs which log all requests made to a S3 bucket. This can be done to another S3 bucket (Even another AWS account)

 **Two Types of Encryption**	
 - In Transit Encryption is done through SSL/TSL encryption
 - At Rest encryption can be done in two ways:
 	1. Server Side Encryption has 3 types:
 		- S3 managed Keys - SSE-S3
 		- AWS Key Management Service, Managed Keys - SSE-KMS (Logs when and by whom the key was Used)
 		- Server Side Encryption with Customer Provided Keys - SSE-C
 	2. Client Side Encryption

## Important points about S3 Transfer Acceleration
 - S3 Transfer Acceleration utilises the CloudFront Edge Network to accelerate your uploads to S3. 
 - Instead of uploading directly to your S3 bucket, you can use a distinct URL to upload directly to an edge location which will then transfer that file to S3. 
 - You will get a distinct URL to upload to.
 - Once you enable the tranfer acceleration for a bucket, you will get an endpoint for your bucket.